---
title: JavaScript Notes 5 (Raw)
published: true
---
Note: These are raw notes taken from the site [javascript.info](https://javascript.info) and are primarily intended for personal reference.


### Index

1. [Methods of primitives](#methods-of-primitives)
2. [Numbers](#numbers)


### Data Types

#### Methods of Primitives

`Date: 10/01/2024`  
Primitives are not objects. But JavaScript allows us to work with primitives as if they were objects. Benefit to this is that we may use many built-in methods to call.

Functions are also objects.

There are many built-in objects in JavaScript (Date, Error, etc.) They all have different properties and methods. These features come at cost, though. Objects are "heavier" and require additional resources to support internal machinery.

- There are lots of operations you'd love to do with primitives.
- Primitives must be light and fast as possible.

Solution:

- Primitives stay a single value.
- The language allows access to methods and properties of:
  + strings,
  + booleans,
  + numbers,
  + symbols.
- For this to work, a special "object wrapper" that provides the extra functionality is created.
- When operation is complete, that object is destroyed.
- Only primitive remains.

The "object wrappers" are different for each primitive type:

- String
- Number
- Boolean
- Symbol

and provide different sets of methods.

Objects are always "truthy" in 'if', even empty objects.

```js
// don't do
new Number(0)  // this is object
// do
Number('123')  // this is number
```

'null' and 'undefined' don't have "wrapper objects" and methods.

Example:

```js
let str = "Foo";
str.test = 5;
alert(str.test);
// --> 'undefined' in no strict mode (this operation is done, but object disappears)
// --> 'error' in strict mode (writing into it in strict mode is an error)
```

So, primitives can't store additional data (proof they're not objects).


#### Numbers

`Date: 11/01/2024`  

Regular numbers in JavaScript are stored in 64-bit format (IEEE-754), also known as *double precision floating point* numbers.

- 52 bits is for storing digits,
- 11 for decimal point precision,
- 1 bit for sign

BigInt numbers are integers of arbitrary length, for numbers exceeding 2^52-1 (+ or -).

Using underscore between groups of zero makes a number more readable. Those underscores are just 'syntactic sugar' and are ignored by the compiler.

To add many zeroes we may use 'e' as exponent.

Numbers can be:

- decimal
- hex: (0xff)
- binary: (0b11101)
- octal: (0o2447)

Methods to use:

- unary + (string to number)
- parseInt(str, base)
- toString(base)
- isNaN(value)
- Number.isNaN(value)
- isFinite(value)
- Number.isFinite(value)
- parseInt()
- parseFloat()
- Math library (floor, ceil, trunc, round)
- num.toFixed(precision)

There are problem with number representation in binary. Solution to round them up and cut the 'tails'.

Evade equality checks when working with decimal fractions.
